[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> An empowered daily
life takes a lot of work.
And the first priority is
that you have to really commit
to not living a wounded life.
What part of nature is devoted
to being broken and wounded?
So that's number one.
Number two is that in order to
really live an empowered life,
you have to understand
what empowered is.
It's not about
speaking your truth.
It's about learning to tell
the truth and pursue the truth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is our last episode
together on "Sacred Power",
so it's going to be a little
bit more personal because I feel
like you've gotten to
know me and how I work
and where I come from and what
my inner nature is all about.
And so I thought I would
take you a little bit more
deeply into how
I would guide you
if you were with me
in my office and you
had questions like, how would
you direct me spiritually?
And so with that in
mind, I've set up
this last episode together.
One of the most
powerful sentences
I've ever read in
my life was written
by the great Catholic Trappist
writer, priest, intellectual,
Thomas Merton in 1968.
These six words grabbed
ahold of my entire life
and positioned it
right in front of me.
"This day will
never come again."
Now, we know it's such a simple
and obvious statement, maybe,
for all of you.
But that struck me as one of
the most significant truths--
and it's a prayer--
that I would ever
realize in my life.
It's a truth that I've reminded
myself of every day since.
I've written about it,
and it's made a difference
in the lives of people.
And I don't know that
Merton ever intended that.
But somehow that last
sentence in his journal
just struck me like
a bolt of lightning,
that thought that
I would never see
the same sunrise, the same
sunset, that no flower would
look the same to me,
that I would never
have the same conversation
with the same people.
This is a once in a
lifetime moment for me.
I will never see their
faces just this way again.
Everything about it
is precious to me.
And I don't know what
will come this day, what
incredible things
may happen or not.
It's become a living truth.
It's become a living prayer.
It means that I don't have time
to waste with small things.
When you think about the
value of friends and family,
you don't wait to tell
them that you love them.
You forgive them fast
and forget even faster.
I don't have time to waste
because this day, this moment,
will never, ever come again.
Deeper than that,
it's vitally important
for you to have a daily
practice for your soul
and that that daily
practice is based
upon sacred truth, sacred
truth that naturally guides
you and contributes to
the world as a structure
of holy and sacred power.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A short recap--
we've learned how
we can become our
own medical intuitive
by slowing down and listening
to what our body is telling us
in every moment.
We've learned how developing
our spiritual self esteem
is absolutely necessary for
a positive and healthy life.
Most importantly of all,
we've learned about power--
the power of choice,
the power of words,
the power of our
invisible deeds,
the power of our archetypal
patterns, the power of grace,
and the power of God
and prayer in our lives.
This episode is about
how you integrate power
into your daily lives.
You know what?
It's not enough to eat
right and to go to the gym.
I think that's great.
I think it's all great.
But you know what?
Those things are not enough.
They're not enough
to make you a whole
and happy and ebullient
and conscious person.
You know what else you need?
You need wisdom.
You need to nourish your soul.
You need a practice
of consciousness.
And you need grace.
You need a steady diet of grace.
There-- I said it.
You need grace.
And so what I want to share
with you is my counsel on what
keeps grace active
for you, what is
a contemporary
spiritual practice
in this world where
some people can't
bear the sound of the word God.
Some people have no
idea what they believe.
Some people are not sure
what goes where when it
comes to spirituality.
I get all that.
But at a much
deeper, deeper level,
I address the sacredness in
you when I'm speaking to you.
And I know that the
sacredness in you
is what we have in
common, is that we're all
seeking the same thing--
how to create a
sacred environment
for yourself and a sacred
practice to sustain yourself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, when you get
up in the morning,
thank heaven for this
day, thank the divine,
this gift that is your life.
And the reason I
ask you to consider
doing that is because the
idea of living in gratitude,
of acknowledging that your life
is measured by more than what's
in your bank account or
whether or not you're
happy or whether or
not you have attention,
that you recognize I am
acknowledging that being alive
is, in fact, the phenomenon that
I am addressing, that if I need
to have stuff in order for
me to acknowledge that it's
good to be alive,
then something's
wrong with this equation.
The fact that I am alive
is enough reason for me
to have gratitude for
this gift of life.
I remember when I was young
that neighbors down the street
got a built-in swimming pool.
They were the first
people on the block
to get a built-in swimming pool.
I was not even 10 years old,
and I heard someone say,
god must have blessed them.
But I remember walking
outside and looking
at the pool and thinking,
god blessed them
with a swimming pool?
With a pool?
What kind of God is that?
The idea of a god
as a "stuffologist"
struck me as being
absolutely absurd.
And I guess, from that
day on, my wiring was
hypersensitive to the idea that
gratitude was based on listing
how much stuff you had instead
of reverence for life itself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The second thing for
a spiritual practice
is that you become conscious
of living congruently,
that your head matches
your heart in terms
of how you make decisions, that
your head matches your heart,
that you walk the way you talk.
Now, you, might not
think that's a big deal.
But I'm going to just
clue you in on something.
It's an enormous, big
effort to get your head
to match your heart.
That becoming congruent,
becoming whole,
is a challenge that
each of us goes through.
Getting the coordinates of how
we think to match how we feel--
this is such a big deal.
And this is how we work.
Our mind works from about 4:00
AM to somewhere around 2:30
in the afternoon.
And then our mind
starts shutting off,
and our heart takes over.
Our mind gets the day shift,
where we're very mental.
And then our heart
gets the evening shift,
and we become very emotional.
So we start talking like,
well, I know what I said
and what I thought, but let
me tell you what I feel.
And so we oftentimes
are like two people
dwelling in one body.
And so long as we're like that--
I know what I think,
but here's how I feel,
I know what I think--
we will be addicts.
Because in between what
you think and what you feel
is your throat.
This is like Papa Bear,
Mama Bear, and Baby Bear.
And Baby Bear never knows
which parent to listen to.
Remember the log jam we
talked about in episode one?
Your mind and your
heart are often
at odds over decisions
in your life.
During this series, you've
been given many tools
to help you unite the power
of your heart and mind.
For example, tell
yourself the truth
about what you are feeling.
Become mindful of using words
like "blame," "deserve,"
and "entitled."
Pay attention to how differently
your mind and heart speak,
often describing
the same situation
in conflicting language,
and then consciously
work to resolve that conflict.
And remind yourself never
to betray your true feelings
by creating excuses.
Use words like "courage,"
"grace," and even "kindness."
So what we do, the only way
to keep our mind and our heart
from talking to each other
so that we can keep ourselves
from becoming whole,
congruent, clear,
is to jam something in
our mouth, is to jam
the circuits between
our head and our heart.
So we overeat.
We drink.
We make choices that
get us in trouble.
We keep our focus
on the outside.
And this keeps our head
from talking to our heart.
And it's a deliberate choice.
And we become addicts.
The choice to live congruently
is a true dedication
to your inner spiritual life.
And you start out small.
You start out small.
Because you can't
plunge into the deep end
of the spiritual pool
right off the bat.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Nobody goes into
their soul unescorted.
So think of me as your escort.
You go in through the shallow
end, just a little bit
at the time.
Because everything about
going into your soul
is so profoundly powerful.
Sacred power is not
something you play with.
It completely
transforms your life.
And as you decide, I'm going
to start following through
and if I feel something's
wrong, I will say it.
I will live there.
I won't tell myself
something is not true.
And what happens as a
result of just beginning
to thread your heart
and your head together
and speaking that way is that
your intuition, your soul,
starts speaking
more clearly to you.
You become a fully
congruent system.
It starts out small, but
it gets bigger and bigger.
So follow me on this.
Stick close to me here.
In order to sustain
the consequence
of becoming a congruent you,
you're going to need prayer.
You're going to need some
kind of deep inner practice.
Because becoming congruent
is going to change your life.
It's going to change your life--
great big, huge-- not
small, great big, huge.
Now that we've
talked about prayer
and you're not thinking anymore
about an off-planet god,
consider praying as
an inner conversation
with a holy companion in which
you ask for guidance and grace,
strength and stamina, to
trust the truth that resonates
within your inner being.
And know this-- prayer is power.
It changes your
life because you are
going to change the speed at
which you understand things.
You're clearing the fog.
These are examples from people
that I've actually worked with,
that I know.
The nature of your
soul is to give you
instruction, is to speak
to you all the time.
For example, this
woman walks in,
and she sensed something
was wrong with her son.
So naturally, she said in her--
I wonder what's
wrong with my son?
And she instantly-- instantly--
her mind, her gut, she
got the impression.
He's on drugs.
He's seriously addicted.
She instantly,
intuitively, knew that--
knew it.
But her heart didn't
want to know it.
It was too painful.
So she chose-- the
fifth chakra's choice--
to make up a different
story, to say no, he's not.
He's just having a bad time.
Maybe he broke up
with his girlfriend.
She couldn't bear
to handle the truth.
So instead of taking
an intuitive hit--
and if she'd acted
on it right away,
she could have saved his life.
But she didn't want
that to be the truth.
[SIREN BLARING]
It was so overwhelming for
her that she immediately
routed it out of her heart
and back into her head
and said, no.
It's probably something
wrong at school.
So she separated her
head and her heart,
with devastating results.
And my heart broke for her.
It still does.
This is where we remember
that life is not always
fair or reasonable
for any of us.
What matters is how we respond
to these difficult situations
when we find ourselves in
the midst of exactly such
a conflict.
But we often forget the truth
that the wisest way to respond
is to combine the power
of our intelligence
and our emotional strength.
How often do we do that?
We get a hit.
We know it's the truth.
But our heart can't bear it.
So we tell ourselves
that it's not the truth.
When I say we need
prayer, what prayer
is all about is this--
help me to deal with truth.
Help me because truth
changes my life.
Truth changes my life.
Becoming a congruent
person means
that your head
and your heart are
going to talk to each other.
And it means that your capacity
to see, sense, and feel
are going to work together
as a team, which makes
you a much more clear person.
Do you say a prayer--
help me handle truth?
Help me because I won't
have the option of denial
like I've had for a long time.
Another thing-- informing
your inner life.
You need to know
what your values are.
I ask people these days
what their values are.
Honestly, the answers I
get are so outrageous.
It's not uncommon for me to
get an answer like, well,
I value convenience.
People, convenience
is not a value.
Clarity is a value, devotion to
family, service to community,
self-respect, and the
nurturing of your inner life.
These are the
values to consider.
Write down the ones
that resonate with you.
Consider the ones you feel
are the most challenging,
and try implementing
them into your life.
I value that which serves life.
What are your values?
I value taking care of
the elders in my family.
What are your values?
Know your values.
I value truth, integrity, honor,
and I don't compromise them.
Live your values.
If you don't know your values,
everything in the world
can control you--
everything.
The slightest problem
out there will scare you
because you don't
trust yourself.
You don't trust yourself.
That's what will get you
into deep spiritual crisis--
the inability to trust yourself.
So let's just hit
a pause button here
and spend a second on that.
Do you trust yourself?
The spiritual path is not
about doing yoga and breathing.
If you want to do
that, that's great.
I do yoga.
It's wonderful.
But the spiritual path is
an excavation into you.
It is about you finding
out what makes you tick.
It's the journey
into self-knowledge.
It's about you excavating your
relationship to this truth.
What is the truth in you?
Because if you can't
trust yourself,
nobody else will ever
be able to trust you.
And that is setting
yourself up for nothing
but one failed relationship in
life for the rest of your life.
And it's all rooted not in your
childhood but in the fact that
you cannot keep your
word to yourself.
That is a true spiritual crisis.
And if you were
sitting here with me,
I would say we are going
to start with that.
We have to build you
from the bottom up,
with giving yourself
your word and keeping it.
I made a promise to myself to
walk for 10 minutes every day.
And like William James said,
suffer not one exception.
You begin by earning
your own respect.
And that is as much a part
of your spiritual path
as anything else.
Everything you say is
an act of creation.
That becomes an
inner creed for you.
So become mindful--
mindful, mindful--
of what you say
and why you say it.
It's not just what we say
to each other, it's why.
And one of the things I
do to regulate myself is I
ask myself, if this isn't
a positive contribution,
why am I doing it?
Understanding why
you do something
is crucial to know because you
are accountable to yourself
and others for the quality
of person that you are.
And at the end of the day,
the only occupant of your life
is you.
So I hold myself accountable
for why I do things,
not just what I do.
It's the why that
you learn from.
Govern the management
of your power.
Govern your power
very carefully.
This is one of the
greatest things
I've learned in Buddhism.
Don't attach yourself
to spectacle.
Your power, your life force,
is the most precious substance.
Your soul, your power,
is precious goods.
Don't give it away.
Don't attach yourself
to something that has
absolutely no value whatsoever.
You don't give yourself away
to decide that I don't like
the tone of voice someone used.
That person insulted me.
And you attach to that, and
the next thing you know,
you're absolutely drained.
Because you gave
yourself to spectacles--
spectacles.
And you are not
allowed to do that.
And you know what?
Even though it sounds
like it's easy, it's not.
It's not.
When we are in the midst
and confronting a spectacle,
that spectacle can
look enormously
like it's not a spectacle.
But I have to admit, I
am short-tempered when
it comes to certain
things-- a lot of things.
You don't need to know
them all, but here's one.
I get very short-tempered with,
and I'm very impatient around,
slow drivers.
Oh, my god, I'm so bad.
And I think that every slow
driver is put there to annoy
me, and especially if I'm late.
And then I think,
this is a setup
to cause me to lose my temper.
And then I really go crazy.
And then I start driving
like I'm a crazy person.
And I can actually
feel my stamina start
draining out of my body.
And this is where I
have to tell myself,
I am totally attaching
to the spectacle.
I lose it around
people who litter.
I am totally capable of
getting out of my car
and going up to
people and practically
screaming in their face
if I see them litter.
I have to control myself and
not attach to that spectacle.
I now no longer get out
of my car and scream.
But I'm going to clean up
twice as much because of that.
It's not my role.
There was once a time
when I was probably
just that kind of litterbug.
I'm not now.
And I'm sending a prayer
that that will somehow
lighten their load.
I've taken a different
path, but I bless them
in the act of cleaning
up something else.
I found a way to
make that positive.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We have to mature our soul.
Everything we do has to
benefit all of us together.
I believe that's truly what a
collective spiritual path is
all about.
You know what?
We have cosmic-sized
problems these days.
In fact, we don't
have problems anymore.
Problems have solutions.
We actually have predicaments.
Predicaments don't
have solutions.
They take us along for the ride.
So we are living in a time
of cosmic predicaments.
It's also a time when the new
era of the nature of the divine
is revealing itself through
us in biospiritual theology,
ecology, with us.
And it's calling us
all to, in a sense,
convert the Earth into a
global ecological community
monastery where all
of us help each other
to sustain life as
a global community.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As challenging as
it is sometimes
to believe that you are a
powerful being, believe it.
Live it.
Trust that truth.
The power we search
for these days
is not outside of ourselves.
It truly is within us.
Everything we do and
say, feel and think,
is an act of creation,
however small and invisible
that act may be.
Never tell yourself that
you are helpless to change
your life or the lives
of others or that you're
incapable of making your
world a better place.
You were born to do
that in your own way.
Now, I'm not an idealist.
I'm not a pessimist.
I'm a realist.
And I know it's going
to take a lot of work.
But I believe deeply in
the power of kindness
and the grace of
generosity, in the goodness
that I know is in each person.
And I believe in the power
of your spiritual practice.
And I know that what is
in one is in the whole
and that I owe you the best of
what's in me for that reason.
And perhaps that
truth will inspire
you to realize that everything
you do matters to everyone
sharing this journey with you.
We live on a sacred grid
together, so what is in one
is in the whole.
And I promise you if you
even just say in your heart,
let the grace of goodness and
holiness surround all of us
in humanity, that
message is delivered
like the holy fire it is.
Thank you, everybody.
[MUSIC PLAYING]